---
layout: post
title: Under the Hood â€” Digital Coins
description: >
  Explains how Swaptacular's digital coins work.
author: Evgeni Pandurski
tags: [under-the-hood]
---

In [a previous post](/2023/09/02/under-the-hood-payments-web-api/) I
outlined how Swaptacular's Payments Web API works. In this post, I will talk
about Swaptacular's *digital coins*.

Every Swaptacular currency is uniquely identified by its *debtor ID* (a
64-bit integer number). In principal, the only thing that you need to know
in order to create an account with a given currency, is the currency's
debtor ID. In practice however, before you decide to create an account, you
will want to see more information about the currency: the name of the
currency, the currency unit, the exchange rate with other currencies, etc.

<!--more-->

Because Swaptacular's network tries to be as decentralized as possible, we
can not entrust a centralized authority to provide essential information
about every Swaptacular currency. To solve this problem, we need a standard
**decentralized way** of providing basic information about Swaptaclar
currencies.

## Digital coins

A "digital coin" is a specific kind of
[URL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URL), that points to a document which
describes a particular Swaptacular currency. There are **3 important
specifications** which deal with this topic:

- ["swpt" URI scheme for Swaptacular](/public/docs/swpt-uri-scheme.pdf)

  This specification defines how Swaptacular currencies and Swaptacular
  accounts can be represented by [Uniform Resource Identifiers
  ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier) (URI).
  
  For example, the URI `swpt:9876543210` represents the Swaptacular currency
  with debtor ID 9876543210; and the URI `swpt:9876543210/my-account`
  represents some random account with that currency.

- [Digital Coins in Swaptacular](/public/docs/digital-coin-urls.pdf)

  This specification defines all the nitty-gritty details of how digital
  coins work in Swaptacular.

  For example, the digital coin:

  > `https://example.com/foo#swpt:9876543210`

  informs us that the document that describes the `swpt:9876543210`
  currency, can be found at the URL `https://example.com/foo`.

  Note that information received via a random `https://` connection can not
  be considered 100% trustworthy for financial applications. Therefore, the
  obtained information must always be verified prior to receiving payments
  to a newly created account.

  By explicitly including the debtor ID in the digital coin (notice the
  `#swpt:9876543210` fragment at the end), the obtained information can be
  verified automatically, without requiring further actions from the user.

- [CoinInfo JSON Documents](/public/docs/coin-info-documents.pdf)

  This specification defines one of the standard document formats
  ([JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON)-based) that can be used for
  describing Swaptacular currencies. Note that, if need be, other document
  formats may also be standardized in the future.

  For example, the following file:
  
        {
          "type": "CoinInfo",
          "debtorName": "Example Currency",
          "summary": "This is an example currency.\n",
          "debtorHomepage": {
            "uri": "https://www.example-currency.com/"
          },
          "amountDivisor": 100,
          "decimalPlaces": 2,
          "unit": "USD",
          "peg": {
            "type": "Peg",
            "exchangeRate": 1,
            "debtorIdentity": {
              "type": "DebtorIdentity",
              "uri": "swpt:666"
            },
            "latestDebtorInfo": {
              "uri": "https://www.usa.gov/USD"
            },
            "display": {
              "type": "PegDisplay",
              "amountDivisor": 100,
              "decimalPlaces": 2,
              "unit": "USD"
            }
          },
          "debtorIdentity": {
            "type": "DebtorIdentity",
            "uri": "swpt:9876543210"
          },
          "latestDebtorInfo": {
            "uri": "https://example.com/foo"
          },
          "revision": 1
        }

  describes a currency named "Example Currency", which is
  [pegged](/2022/07/03/what-is-a-currency-peg/) to the US dollar with 1-to-1
  exchange ratio (the URIs are made-up).

  In practice, the document that describes a given currency will be hosted
  on a server operated by the [debtors agent node](/overview/) which is
  responsible for managing the currency.

  A limited number of well-known currencies (like the USD), will have
  well-known debtor IDs, and their descriptions will be immutable and
  accessible at well-known locations.

## Sharing digital coins

Because Swaptacular's digital coins really are just URLs, and therefore can
be easily copied, they are more similar to **photographs of physical
coins**, than to the physical coins themselves: Having a photograph of a
physical coin does not make you an owner of a coin, but allows you to
recognize this kind of coins whenever somebody wants to pay you with them.
To make the "photograph" metaphor complete, Swaptacular's digital coins will
most often be presented as [QR
codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QR_code).

It works like this: When you want to create an account with a given
currency, you scan the digital coin of this currency (a QR code) with your
phone. You review the currency's description, and confirm that you want a
new account. Then you can receive and make payments in this currency.

Note however, that when a stranger introduces you to a new digital coin, the
dangers are similar to the dangers when a stranger introduces you to an
unknown foreign currency: You could be tricked by fraudsters, and be paid
with worthless coins.

For this reason, it is generally a bad idea to share digital coins via
unauthenticated email messages. Instead, the recommenced way of sharing
digital coins is to scan their QR codes directly from paper, or from a
computer screen. This gives a physical context to the act of receiving very
important information, from a potentially untrustworthy source.

## Dummy accounts

Sometimes when you scan a digital coin, your [creditors agent](/overview/)
will not have an established connection to the [accounting
authority](/overview) that manages the currency. In this case, you will not
be able to receive or make payments in this currency, but thanks to the
information obtained from the document that describes the currency, you
still can create a *dummy account* with the currency.

Dummy accounts can be useful as value-references to which other accounts are
pegged.

## Dummy debtors

Some Swaptacular currencies will be used only to represent a physical value
measurement unit (like ounces of gold, US dollar bills etc.). Those *dummy
debtors* do not represent a person or an organization, do not owe anything
to anyone, and are used solely as identifiers of **value measurement
units**. Accounts with dummy debtors are always dummy accounts.

In practice, most Swaptacular currencies will be pegged to national
currencies, which are dummy debtor currencies (no pun intended). All debtor
IDs in the range from 0 to 4294967295 are reserved for well-known dummy
debtor currencies.

## Conclusion

- Swaptaclar's digital coins are a decentralized way of providing basic
  information about Swaptaclar currencies.

- Every Swaptacular currency has an unique digital coin, represented by a QR
  code. The issuer of each currency (the debtor) can publish its digital
  coin on his/her website, advertisements, business cards etc.

- Friends and business partners can share digital coins with each other,
  thus expunging the use the currencies that are most useful to them.

In the next post I will talk about Swaptacular payment requests.
